>> My name is Jussi-Pekka Mantere.
I am Engineering Manager in the Mac OS X Server Team.
Brendan Langoulant will join me later.
He's Engineering Manager on the Address Book Team.
So what are the topics for today?
So we'll talk about contacts, if you couldn't
tell that from the session description.
So we'll go over contacts, how
we use them, where we use them.
We'll go over where we use them on the
iPhone, what are new features on iPhone 3.0
and Address Book in Snow Leopard, new features there.
And final, we'll conclude with the Address
Book Server in Mac OS X Server in Snow Leopard.
So a little bit of a background for people
who don't know what really contacts are.
So, personal contacts.
So this is basically people you interact in day and day out.
So this could this be your family, this could
be your friends, could be your colleagues,
basically people you interact with regular basis.
Contacts for these people, you'd keep them on your
phone, on your desktop so they could be on any device.
And if you have multiple devices that
you have your contacts on, you sync them.
So you have an iPhone, you sync that
with your Mac OS X Address Book.
On Windows you would have iTunes sync to the Windows Address
Book and you might also use some services on the cloud,
such as MobileMe or Google and Yahoo and
use those to store your contacts centrally.
And you also have Work Contacts and the
distinction here is that, in your office,
you probably have something like a directory.
So this includes like everybody in your company that you
may interact with at some point, email or chat or call,
but you don't necessarily have them in your--
in your Contacts Data Base in your Address
Book or on the Contacts on the iPhone.
And you-- in the workplace you might also
have some contacts that are private to you.
So the distinction here is that your private work
contacts may be some things like business partners
and these aren't your personal contacts, you don't interact
with these kind of contacts in your off-work-hours life.
But they are people that you work with in your
work environment and might not have available
in the company directory because they're private to you.
And in your work environment, your
contacts would be stored on a server.
So right now, that's most typically Exchange
setup and coming up with Mac OS X Snow Leopard,
you might also store the contacts on Address Book Server.
So that's personal and work contacts.
So where do you use these contacts?
Well basically it's anywhere, everywhere, so
you search for contacts and you might mail them.
You do chatting.
You schedule with your contacts.
You try to find a location.
You map your contacts if it's a restaurant.
You call them on your iPhone and you
might share your contacts using vCards.
So contacts are all around us all the time
and it's kind of, it's like ubiquitous thing
that we don't really pay attention to,
well except when things don't work,
but it's just pervasive in our day-in-day-out lives.
So we email people, we use contacts.
We chat or call people, we use contacts.
We find locations, we use contacts.
So that's using contacts.
So what are the Apple solutions for working with contacts?
So, let's start from the small to the big.
So on the iPhone, we have the iPhone Contacts application.
On Mac OS X, we have the Address Book application.
And new in Mac OS X Snow Leopard,
we have the Address Book Server.
So we'll talk about that in detail later.
So let's start with the small.
So, on the iPhone.
So what are the contacts solutions on the iPhone?
So right now, your iPhone Contacts is probably
a merge of personal and work contacts,
so this is the pool of people you connect to or interact
with by using your iPhone, call
people or text them or whatnot.
And your contacts are synced to the desktop.
So again, using iTunes you would sync your contacts
between your Address Book on Mac OS and the iPhone.
And iPhone 2.0 introduced ActiveSync.
So it might also have your work contacts from your
office environment on the iPhone using ActiveSync.
And new in iPhone 3.0 is the ability to
connect to your corporate directory using LDAP.
So that's something we introduced in 3.0 and
sometimes that can be a little bit tricky to configure.
So if you're not familiar with iPhone Configuration Utility,
I highly recommend that you take a
look at that on Apple's download site.
So if you ever tried to type in, a let's
say, search path for LDAP on the iPhone,
"DC, CN=blah, blah, blah, DC=, C=something."
That's a fairly painful exercise.
So if you provide your users with
just text instructions on how
to configure your iPhone they may not
necessarily use this service so much.
So we have a way in iPhone Configuration
Utility, now to configure LDAP search paths
that are accessible through the iPhone Contacts application.
So if you know that your company
supports an LDAP directory and you know
that your organization has iPhone users
deployed, you might as well do your users a favor
and use iPhone Configuration Utility to
create a configuration profile for LDAP search
that tells them exactly how the iPhone should be configured,
and users can just download the configuration file,
or receive it by email and then their LDAP search on
the phone would be configured automatically for them
without them having to type anything by hand.
So let me bring up Brendan Langoulant.
So he'll show some of the new features
on iPhone Contacts, Brendan?
[ Applause ]
[ Pause ]
>> Good morning, so just as Jussi
was saying, one of the great things
about this demo is actually that
I don't have to type so much.
So with-- as you can see this is a
standard iPhone 2.0 configuration.
I've got one Exchange account configured.
And so what I'm going to show you is actually an IPCU file--
profile that's been emailed to me that I'm
going to configure my LDAP search with.
So you can see here, I've got an email, here's
an attachment, I simply click on the attachment,
and it asks me, "Would you like to configure?"
I say "install."
[ Pause ]
>> Great. So now if I go back to my
contacts, you notice we have a new entry.
So the new entry-- my LDAP search is now configured,
probably the easiest LDAP configuration I've ever done.
And you can see that it searches and I can
find results just like you would expect.
OK, so also, something which is available
in 2.0 and just to go through it.
You can see we have the Exchange global address list.
It searches much like an LDAP would search.
Again, it's a directory of people
and I have my private contacts.
So I have my VIPs and the rest of my contacts.
Great. So that's iPhone LDAP automatic
configuration from IPCU.
Back to Jussi.
[ Applause ]
>> Alright, so thank you Brendan.
So that's iPhone and new features in iPhone.
So LDAP requires, obviously an LDAP server,
requires 3.0 version of the iPhone operating system.
ActiveSync on the phone requires
Exchange Server 2003 Service Pack 2
and works also with Exchange Server version 2007.
If you use iPhone Configuration Utility for any of the
policies, you'll need Exchange 2007 Service Pack 1.
So that's the iPhone section.
So let's move on to the desktop solution.
So Mac OS X Address Book.
So what do we have there?
So in Address Book, on the desktop right
now, you have your personal contacts again.
So you could be syncing these using
either MobileMe or Google or Yahoo,
and you would sync these using
iTunes, again, to your mobile device.
And the work contacts in Address Book on the
desktop can be in a directory system such LDAP,
or you could access them from interactive system over LDAP.
And if your clients are bound using a directory service
binding for a corporate network, if you use network logins
for example, then Address Book would also allow you
to search using the Directory Services interface.
So this is no manual configuration required.
So you might be bound to an Open Directory environment.
You might be bound to an Active Directory environment.
And Address Book application will automatically
do searches against these directory systems
without any user configuration outside of
binding their clients to the directory system.
And what's new in Address Book in Mac OS 10.6
in Snow Leopard, is support for Exchange.
So again, we can use contacts stored on an
Exchange server and use the contacts there.
So back to Brendan, and he'll show you
some of these new features in Address Book.
>> OK. So I've been responsible for Exchange
on the desktop across all three applications.
And we've been working really hard to make this the
easiest to use Exchange setup that you've ever seen.
So really, what I'm going to do, is we support all of
the-- as you can see I have got the standard configuration.
>> It is a simple Address Book as you can get.
I've got one group and I've got all of my local contacts.
So what I'm going to do now is
actually add an Exchange account.
So with Exchange, we've spent a lot of time basically trying
to make auto-configure work as seamlessly as possible.
So you simply provide an email address and
your password which hopefully I type correctly.
Now it's going out, it's looking for the
auto-discovery server, in a minute it will find it.
And you can see now, it actually figured out all of settings
that I made to actually configure this Exchange account.
Also you'll see, that I can set up both
the mail client and iCal at the same time.
So you can actually do that.
You can set your Exchange accounts
up from any of the applications
and it will automatically set up the other two applications.
[ Pause ]
>> I'll give it a different name.
So now what you can see is, I have
my Exchange account has appeared.
I have a set of contacts on that Exchange account.
And just like you saw, exactly on the same as the iPhone,
I've got those same folders that the iPhone is syncing to.
So it has collected those contacts and
has showed me all of my private contacts.
We also have a directory search mode so
that I can search the global address list.
And just like I have on the phone, I can search--
it will give me results from that directory.
So generally, our approach to integrating Exchange
on the desktop has been to follow what Microsoft--
how Microsoft tries to use Exchange, in particular Outlook.
But then what we've tried to do is actually
leverage, I guess, the way that Mac uses--
used to configuring an application or using an application.
So, if you see here, I've got this group called VIP.
So it's actually folder called "VIP," and that's good.
[ Pause ]
>> So I can create a new address.
And if type VIP, what will happen is,
that will actually use that folder,
much like a group mailing list and
actually it will expand in line.
So that's something which Exchange
doesn't do, or Outlook doesn't do.
But we've actually kind of extended
that with the standard Mac experience.
So what happens if you're not using Exchange?
And for that I'll bring back Jussi.
[ Applause ]
>> Yes, great demos.
So, before we move on, Exchange Requirements again.
So, we need Mac OS X Snow Leopard for the
desktop to be able to support Exchange.
So go get those 29 dollar copi)es and spread them wide.
For the Service side, we need Update Rollup 4
for Exchange Server 2007 SP1, URFES 2007 SP1.
And that's basically all you need to get your work
contacts that are now on Exchange accessible for the Mac.
So moving on, new in Mac OS X Snow Leopard.
So this is Mac OS X Server Address Book Server.
So we introduced this last year as
part of the developer conference.
And now this is included in the builds
that are distributed during the conference.
So the current DVDs that you have, have the full
implementation of the Mac OS X Server Address Book Server.
So about Server Contacts.
So typically, why would you have a server?
So this is ideal where you have multiple devices
that are using some service like mail or contacts
and using a server account always remain up to date.
So you could have a single account on a server and
all your data no matter where you access it from,
from what ever device, it's always current.
And additionally, you may have some server enabled
features, such as, search, or sharing, or what not,
because it's guaranteed to be available
and it's not just restricted
to applications that you'd use like mail for messaging.
You might have things like global address lists on
Exchange that are only provided through a server
that you wouldn't be able to implement
just using your local context for example.
So, servers are pretty cool things for
doing more advanced usage of these services.
So for Mac OS X.
So we have a suite of communication applications.
So we have your mail application, you
have calendaring, chatting, and contacts.
So for all of these we also have
great servers on Mac OS X Server.
So we have a mail server that your mail clients
can connect to and retrieve and send mail.
We have a calendar server, so you can now
have scheduling in a server environment
or leverage in a server, we have a chat server.
And all of these basically implement their typical things.
But for contacts, we really don't have
anything right now-- for protocols, excuse me.
So for protocols, we have always
followed the standards path.
So for our messaging protocols,
we're not doing anything proprietary.
We're using the IETF standards or the RFCs for either
messaging or for calendaring or for instant messaging.
So everything that we built in to the server
is open standards based, it's extensible.
So we don't embrace and extinguish, we embrace and extend.
So you have the freedom of choice and you're
not locked-in into any particular platform.
So standards are important to us.
So if you choose OS X server, you're
choosing open standards.
But for contacts, there really hasn't been
an equivalent of a CalDav or IMAP or SMTP.
But just in the past couple of years, there has been
development on the IETF work groups to develop a standard
for contacts based on servers and
that standard is called CardDAV.
And we've build the Mac OS X Address
Book Server on top of CardDAV.
And that's what we introduced last year,
and that's what we're now had made available
to you on the DVDs distributed here.
So let's look back.
So we built the Calendar server in
Mac OS X Server Leopard in 10.5.
And what is Calendar server really?
In the essence of it, it's a protocol that allows you
access to web stored resources, and that's WebDAV.
And the data format is pretty much calendar events.
So iCalendar files that are reachable by
the clients over the network using WebDAV.
So that gives us CalDAV.
There are other pieces to CalDAV
for, like discovering free visit
[ phonetic] and whatnot.
But in the essence of it, it's dealing
with iCalendar files over the network.
So that's what's left.
And that's a standard that's been out there for a while.
And for contacts, we already have a standard
for contact Exchange, so that's vCard.
So vCard was developed years and years ago
by a consortium, Apple is a part of that.
And if we look at Exchanging vCards over the network, we
could utilize exactly the same infrastructure that we have
for CalDAV that is using WebDAV as
the network transport mechanism.
And instead of moving iCal files
around and doing scheduling,
we can move vCards around and do contact discovery.
So that gives us CardDAV.
So vCard's really a ubiquitous standard for
changing or exchanging contact information.
So this is something that pretty much
every device known to man understands
and writes if they have anything to with contacts.
Your phone will understand vCards.
Your laptop, be it Windows or was it running
Windows or Mac OS X will understand vCards.
So vCards, you can pass them around and expect
that the information will be transferred
from application to application without any issues.
There's one unique thing in vCards in
the CardDAV server in the CardDAV space.
So in CardDAV, we need to be able
to uniquely identify vCards.
So there's a requirement for any
vCard that's stored on the server.
So it has a unique ID attached to that.
Most of the clients will take care of that
when they store the contacts on the server.
So, a little bit more about the CardDAV.
So CardDAV again, is based on existing standards.
We use XML, we use HTTP, we use
WebDAV, and ACLs on top of that.
And as the payload, we have vCard.
So it tells you how to use Address
Book collections over the network.
So it also defines where these resources are stored.
So it tells the client where their Address Book
collections are and defines a hierarchy of objects.
So in the end there will be vCards in some path on a server.
So CardDAV defines that nomenclature as well.
And finally, CardDAV has extensions,
just like CalDAV has extensions
for calendaring, for freebies [phonetic], and whatnot.
CardDAV has extensions for contact-specific domain.
So for example, if you want to do a search, there's
a CardDAV feature for doing search against contacts.
And these are called "reports.
>> So we use reports to discover your
Address Book collection for example.
We use reports to do searches against the server.
So these are extensions on top of the DAV
protocol and that are unique to CardDAV.
So, here are all the nomenclatures
about vCard, WebDAV, and CardDAV.
So all the good RFCs are there, SSL, there's DAV,
there's HTTP, and extensions that we use in CardDAV.
So the server implements a method for
creating new Address Book collections.
So creating an Address Book on the server and that is
using the-- make a collection extension to DAV protocol.
And all of these are still-- the vCard protocol
itself, excuse me, CardDAV specification is still
in ratification going through final runs of comments
and should be standardized as an RFC momentarily
in the next weeks or months, but soon, we hope.
So without further ado, let me invite Brendan back.
And he'll show you how Address
Book Server on the client works.
>> So about this time, you should be
starting to notice a theme in these demos.
So now, I'm going to add a CardDAV account.
Oops sorry.
I suppose-- I was hiding the account
configuration for CardDAV.
[ Laughs ]
>> So again, we create an account.
I'll give it a different name.
>> And you'll see now, again, I have my private
contacts on the CardDAV server, they've been downloaded.
CardDAV has groups.
So we have our supplier, Intel.
So again, and also I can do directories.
And so if I go in here, you can actually
see-- I can search the CardDAV server
And again, I'm doing a directory search.
This time it's going through CardDAV.
The previous times were Exchange.
So, what you'll notice now is actually, we've-
Address Book is really starting to come
of age as a network contact base manager.
And so, we started to get this
hierarchy of different sources.
And one of things we thought was really important is
to allow you to use these in different environments.
So we want people to be able to use
it in a pure corporate environment
where you would likely only have one Exchange account.
We also want you to be able to use it at
home, so that you can actually have it
so that you've got your private contacts or your
personal contacts separated from your Exchange contacts,
but still being able to use both in that home environment.
So as you can see, so that in the
UI they are very separated.
But also when you're looking for a contact, you often
just want to find the contact, no matter where it is.
So, we've added these higher level constructs.
So, all contacts will actually look across all of the
different sources through all of my private contacts.
So you'll see the brown folder and all
of brown folders that go beneath that,
it will actually get an aggregate
of all of those different sources.
Um, you can also do things like setup smart groups.
And smart groups would actually again,
search across all of those different sources.
So if I go back to mail and I show the People Picker, you
can see-- it also reflects all of these different sources
and in much the same way as the
hierarchy from the Address Book.
Now you can actually address people
directly from the People Picker.
So hopefully you can see, we've tried to keep
to it as simple as possible and as uniform
as possible only really changing
it where absolutely necessary.
Thank you.
[ Applause ]
>> Alright, thank you again, Brendan.
So, what are the applications that we
support for Address Book Server accounts?
So as Brendan showed you, the contacts are
available for all the Apple applications.
So if you are using mail, if you are using calendaring,
if you are using iChats, the contacts are stored either
on Exchange server or on the Address Book Server, they will
be available through all the applications you'd expect.
And what about the Address Book Server itself?
So, this is a feature in Mac OS X Server.
And in Mac OS X Server, you have the usual
suspects for administering the service.
So you will use server preferences, you will
use serveradmin, or you can use serveradmin
from the command line, or if you're really geeking
out then you could actually use the web
interface to the serveradmin back-end.
So let me move on to a demo.
So let me show you how that is all set up.
OK, so first we have server preferences.
So for Address Book Server, we have a module in server
preferences and that's basically an on-off switch.
So out of the gate, when you were setting
up Mac OS X Server for the first time--
Mac OS X Server Snow Leopard for the
first time, you would have had an option
to enable all the usual services including Address Book.
So this would come on for you during setup.
So nothing much there, on and off,
and [inaudible] for contacts.
So if people have large attachments in their vCards,
attachments being binary objects in the vCards,
for example large pictures, you may want to
limit the size of individual Address Books.
But for the admin interface that's
really all the customization we need.
Everything else is set up out of
the box, it works out of the gate.
No tweaking necessary.
But if you do want to configure further
aspects of the Address Book service,
you can use the server admin application.
So in server admin, of course we have
a-- let me bring back the overview.
So this tells you that the server is running.
What you'd expect from server-- server admin, we can
view some of the logs for access log and error logs.
And we have additional settings.
So these settings are not available
through server preferences because we see
that these advanced configuration
options that are not typically changed.
So the default out of the box configuration is fairly
good standard to use and it will provide your users
with the expected services that
we think are most useful for that.
So we define the location where we store the contacts.
So if you are using a setup where your server may not
necessarily always retain its data on the boot volume,
you may want to use a data volume to store the Address
Book Server documents, so you can change that here.
And you can also change the directory gateway settings.
So this is the way for the Address Book server clients
over CardDAV to query contacts in a directory system.
So that's something that uses the CardDav
reports feature that I mentioned earlier.
And for authentication, this the way you'd
actually bind a SSL certificate for the service.
Or you could say, use a redirect,
which means that any client
that would connect using the standard
non-secured port for the Address Book Server,
which now will be redirected to
the SSL secured port for access.
[Applause] And-- thank you Eric [phonetic].
And this will also be available in other services.
So for example, iCal server has this same option.
So let me revert these settings
and just go back to server admin.
So, a little bit more about the directory gateway.
So this is a way for you to provide the Address Book Server
clients on the desktop a way to search your directory.
So not using Directory Services on the desktop, not using
LDAP on the desktop, but using CardDAV as the conduit.
So what are the benefits of that?
So, then you don't have to have-- if you're using--
if you have people who are outside the Firewall,
you wouldn't have to have holes in the
Firewall for accessing different protocols
because CardDAV would be using HTTP, you might proxy that.
You could route that easily.
So this is probably more acceptable protocol to some
network administrators versus Directory Services or LDAP.
So let me show you what this looks like on the client side.
So here, I have an Address Book application
configured for Address Book Server account.
So, I have my adapted DC server here, I have an account for
CardDAV here, and I also have configured an LDAP gateway.
So here, I had to type-in the LDAP information by hand.
So this is one of the account types
that Address Book now has.
So as you saw in earlier demos, Brendan
showed you how to configure Exchange
on the Address Book and we have CardDAV, obviously.
Address Book now supports multiple accounts and there's
really, really no limit to what information you are going
to access to from your Address Book application.
So for LDAP, the directory search notes
appear in the old directory's note.
So this is kind of confusing, no?
Because my server is bound to itself, so it is using Open
Directory on the local system and I have configured LDAP
on the client for Address Book on the client here.
And I'm also connected to the CardDAV
account and its directory search gateway.
>> So if I perform a search here for John Appleseed.
So I get three distinct results.
One for each source: one for the LDAP search
note, one for the Directory Services support,
and one for the Address Book service search.
So I can get rid of the LDAP service by
deleting it from the Address Book accounts.
So I can do that easily here.
So now, I don't have the LDAP search note anymore, but
I'm still left with the directory gateway that's served
by the Address Book Server feature in Address Book.
And if my users are in this kind of environment--
if your users are in this kind of environment where
you have configured their systems to always be bound
to directory system, and that happens to be
the same directory system that is also used
by the Address Book Server, then this is kind of
redundant, like we don't want to have your users
to receive duplicate entries for any searches that they do.
So this is not necessarily ideal.
So let me show you how to disable
that feature for this configuration.
So I quit Address Book and go back
into the server admin interface.
So I can deselect both of these options.
So this means that I'm disabling the directory
gateway for this server configuration.
So, knowing that all my users are using directory bound
systems and they will automatically get the directory search
in Address Book or mail or whatever applications.
I don't need to provide the directory
gateway through CardDAV in addition
to all the other search methods the clients already have.
So if I now go back to my user and bring up Address Book,
you'll notice that the directory service
note is just a singular note again.
So Address Book was smart enough to collapse the search
notes into the single search note that's available to it.
And if this was just the CardDAV account
or the Address Book Server account,
it would show only the Address Book Server account here
assuming that the system wasn't bound to a directory system.
So, that's the way you could tailor the settings through
server admin, to suit your particular environment.
So, let me go back to server admin again.
Oops.
[ Pause ]
>> And while we wait, OK.
So we return.
So that is the way to disable the directory gateway.
And a little bit more detail about the directory gateway.
So what is the difference between
user accounts and shared contacts?
User accounts are exactly that, these are users
who can log-on to the system that have been created
to using work group manager or are in the
actual directory environment as users.
Shared contacts are contacts that have been
created using for example, directory app.
So depending on your usage environment, if you have lots
of users who have stored contacts using other applications,
then you may want to enable or disable one
of these options depending on your settings.
So let's bring that back up and that's server admin.
So OK. So we have a great UI to
administer the service and have ways
of easily enabling secure transport layer,
enabling certificate use, and what not.
But under the hood, there are many more
options that are not available through the UI.
So let me hide server admin.
And bring up the command line.
So this is your uber-geek way of administering the service.
So for example, if I use the server admin command
line tool, if I can type it correctly, A-D-M-I-N,
Address Book settings, oops, server admin
Address Book-- settings Address Book.
There. So here are all the settings that are
configurable inside the Address Book Server.
So for example, I can look at where
my logs are stored, grep CardDAV.
So I can see for example, that my access log is stored
in var log CardDAV d which is most likely the case.
So here, we have var log CardDAV
d and we have the access logs.
For some reason, I may not want to have
these stored in the standard location.
So I can actually change the setting and
apply some custom path to the access log.
So let's say, I want to keep it in my
temp directory for whatever reason.
So let's call it CardDAV-accesslog
and call it TMP/CardDAVaccesslog.
So I have just now changed the setting for the logging.
And this hasn't taken effect yet
because I haven't restarted the service.
So I can see like is there a file
called TMP CardDAV, no such file.
And I can also use the server admin
interface to recycle the service.
So I can start stop Address Book.
So now, I have just killed the service.
So any clients would have lost their connection.
And I can start it again.
And now, if I look at the logs, the log
has just moved in to the temp directory.
So there are ways of tailoring some of the
settings in the Address Book Server itself
by using the server admin command line interface.
So this is just one of those settings.
And a full list of the settings that we have implemented
is available just running the server admin command.
And this tells you everything that we have for
authentication and error logs and what not.
So this might be useful for tailoring some of
the server settings to be more site specific.
And yeah, so this is a supported way of configuring
the Address Book Server from the command line.
And there's also a uber-, uber-geek
way of configuring the services.
So this is using the webserver that's embedded
into the server admin interface in Mac OS X Server.
So I could read these settings that I
just showed using the web interface.
And here, I have let's say, .log,
here's an error log, oops, error log.
So I have the access log and other settings now
available through the web interface as well.
So this is extremely high end way of customizing
some of the settings for the Address Book Server.
So, now, we have gone through the contacts
solutions on Mac OS X on different platforms.
So we have contacts on the iPhone, we have contacts on
your desktop using Address Book, we have contacts available
on a server using Address Book
Server new to Mac OS X Snow Leopard.
And that's the whole gamut of how you could use Apple
services to basically involve your life with either contacts
on a phone, calling people, or emailing people,
or storing your contacts on Mac OS X Server.
So, that concludes the presentation part.
So for more information, you can go to Apple's evangelist,
Mark Malone who's the Evangelist for
Internet and Server Technologies.
For iPhone specific content, you
can go to the iPhone developer site.
And of course, there's Mac OS X Server site on apple.com.